There's no doubt that Jesus was the great teacher, and there were many reasons for that, but
one of them is that he really understood the people that he was dealing with.
He knew what was really inside.
Now he had God-given ability to actually read hearts, but he also had abilities that
they got from his father as well, such as insight, discernment, understanding, wisdom, and
all of this combined to make him an outstanding teacher.
Well, obviously we can't read hearts, but we can imitate Jesus and developing the qualities
that will help us to be the most effective in helping others, for example, insight.
How would you define it?
It's the ability to see into a situation, to act with discretion, to be successful.
It means not just looking at the obvious, but going deeper.
It's related to understanding, understanding is the ability to distinguish different components
of a subject or situation, but insight goes further.
It's an intelligent knowledge of the reason, in other words, it answers the question, why?
Why is this happening?
Or why would I say what I'm about to say, because that's the best thing to say?
It's related also to discernment.
That's being keen in judgment, perceiving differences, being able to see what appears
to be one way, but may not be that way at all.
And it helps to identify the true needs of a person or the real problem.
Now, to illustrate how the use of these qualities can be very helpful.
Suppose someone in the congregation comes to you and says, I'm really having a problem
controlling the temper, I'm getting angry.
So now right away we may think, and rightfully so, well, I have a number of scriptures
that I can share with you about controlling anger, controlling the tongue, not letting
you bad thing come out of our mouth, and those are excellent.
But the teacher or the helpful counselor that will do the best good would want to do what.
He'd want to ask the question, why?
Why are you getting angry?
Can you pinpoint it?
Are you feeling well?
Have you not gotten enough rest?
Is there a catalyst at work, at school, in the congregation, at home?
And then after determining why the most effective scriptures and the most encouragement can
be given?
And where do we get these qualities of insight, discernment, understanding?
Well, they come from Jehovah, don't they?
John 32.8 says, I will give you insight and instruct you in the way you should go.
And he does that through his word, but also through his organization.
Jeremiah 3.15 says, and I will give you shepherds after my own heart, and they will feed
you with knowledge and insight.
So we're blessed to have Jehovah's Word at the Faithland Discrete Slave to assist us
to gain these qualities.
And how will it help us?
Open your Bible, please, to Psalm 119, and let's read together, verse 99.
Psalm 119, verse 99.
I have more insight than all my teachers, because I ponder over your reminders.
Now, you notice the Psalmist did not say, I can quote more scriptures than anybody else.
And I can answer all the difficult Bible questions, no problem.
No, in this context, he says, I have more insight.
Jehovah has given me the ability to see beyond the obvious in myself and also in my ability
to help someone else.
Well, how do we learn to display this?
Well, we go back to our exemplar Jesus, and we start with his approach to people.
Warm, kind, affectionate, compassionate, empathetic.
And when a person conveys that spirit, those that he is trying to help, they feel comfortable,
and they're more likely to reveal what may be in their heart.
So with that fine approach, Jesus was able to put himself in others situation, to have
empathy and compassion, for example, with Martha and Mary at the time of Lazarus death.
So we can appreciate, can't we, that that is a critical element of being insightful,
making others feel comfortable.
But then what else can we do to find out what's really in a person's heart?
We can't read it.
Well, let's open our vivals to the Procure Proverbs, chapter 20.
Proverbs, chapter 20, and let's look at verse 5.
The thoughts of a man's heart are like deep waters, but the diserning man draws them out.
So how does he do that?
By questions, he seeks knowledge.
He gathers facts in line with Proverbs 15, 14, where it talks out the wise one, the understanding
one seeks knowledge.
So he doesn't answer before he has all the facts, and he uses tactful and respectful questions.
But he doesn't probe to the point of embarrassment unnecessarily.
And he realizes that point blank questions, blunt questions, may give him an answer, but
they can be very harmful, especially if they insinuate a suspicion of wrongdoing without
any warranting of that.
Such questions may cause deep wounds, as described at Proverbs 12, 18, thoughtless speech
is like the stabs of the sword, so respectful, gentle, meaningful questions.
And then listen, swift about listening, slow about speaking according to James, and
not overreacting to what they may say.
We have an effect.
Ask them, please tell us, how do you feel about this or what's happening?
And if they tell us, we can't get mad at them because we ask them.
So there's a time to be quiet.
We ask a meaningful, tactful question, and an ecclesiastes three, seven applies, a time
to be silent, and a time to speak.
Now not talking too much helps us another way, because Proverbs 10, 19 says, when words
or many transgression cannot be avoided, but whoever controls his lips acts discreetly.
So there's this matter of being cautious with how much we talk, especially before we have
all the facts.
We want the complete picture with thoughtful questions, and then we can be able to assist.
And if they say something, we want to be careful that we don't overreact.
It's insightful, and it shows discernment, not to overreact.
And here's an illustration of that.
A Christian couple noticed that their daughter was withdrawing from family association.
She would isolate herself and want to be by herself.
So they gently questioned her, trying to find out what's happening.
She never would open up.
They kept up kindly, patiently.
And one day the mother went into the daughter's bedroom, sat down, put her arm around her
daughter and said, honey, tell me what's happening.
So she said, well, mom, I don't feel like that you and the rest of the family like my
company.
So I'm staying away as much as possible.
So now the mother's first reaction she reported, the mother said, I wanted to say that is
absolutely ridiculous.
But then I held it in, she said, and I listened, and she poured out her heart.
She got better.
The family made some adjustments, and in time this fine young woman went into the full-time
service.
But let's think back.
What if the mother had not used discernment and insight when her daughter told her what
the problem was, and she did say, that's ridiculous.
What would that have done to the daughter?
Well, now you think I'm stupid.
And I'm ridiculous.
Well, that really helps a lot.
Thank you very much.
I feel even more willing to be with you folks now.
Well, it would have happened that way, perhaps.
But it does show the value of listening and not or reacting to get really what's in a
person's heart.
And when they tell us, we respond accordingly.
So in imitation of Christ, we want to know what's inside people so that we can help them
the most.
But we do that by relying on insight and discernment that Jehovah gives us, and by being compassionate
and caring and kind, and probing gently to find out what the real problem is, so we can
use the most effective scriptures to help them for that particular problem.